CHAPTER 10
WHY ZEN MEDITATION IS ESSENTIAL MIND TRAINING

"Art is frozen Zen."
   — R.H. BLYTH


Although not a requirement for REBT and CBT, I highly recommend regular meditation to anyone struggling with the four blocks. I'm not talking about some mystical, woo-woo, 'people-sitting-cross-legged-chanting-Om' kind of thing (not that there's anything wrong with that). Rather, I encourage training yourself to be aware: to observe your thoughts without reacting, to appreciate the mind-body connection, to develop a non-clinging mind, and to flow with Now. Awareness is key to being able to red-flag and dispute, and thus essential to changing your belief system and to stop being disturbed.

The practice I recommend, as stated above, is Zen, which literally means meditation. The goal of this type of meditation is to bring a full awareness to the mind, body, breath, sensations, feelings, thoughts, and to be fully present in the flow of Now. It's essentially training in learning to see things as they really are without mental labeling and chatter. This form of meditation can be universally practiced by people of any religion or creed.

The basic practice of Zen involves sitting or lying in a quiet place, in a comfortable position with a straight back (not stiff), and focusing on your breathing. When you have calmed yourself and are only aware of your breathing—in and out, in and out—you are able to observe sensations, thoughts, and feelings, and note how fleeting they are. You can feel something or see something and then let it go. When you do this consistently, you achieve two goals: the first is that you are able to observe your thoughts without being caught up in them, and the second is that you are able to see that they only last for a finite amount of time. Think about when you have an itch. What happens when you scratch it? You make it worse, right? But if you focus on the physical sensation of the itch, the itchiness eventually fades away and is gone. It is like this for every sensation—if you don't scratch it and make it worse, it goes away. And we make it worse by our thoughts. The Buddha said: "We are a sum total of all we have thought."

Although it is best to meditate in a quiet place when you first start meditation, as you grasp the concepts more fully you will be able to practice in any situation, even in the middle of Time's Square on New Year's eve! This is why so many people enjoy so-called 'mindless' hobbies such as knitting, sewing, or painting; they provide a calm and pleasant environment in which they can let go of their thoughts and connect to the Now moment. In fact, any activity that takes you out of your inner dialogue and engages your six senses, such as TV, movies, or reading, will help you tap into the flow state of complete, unthinking immersion in the moment.

As you integrate Zen into your daily routine, you'll find it easier to turn to meditation in the moment you are feeling Anger, Anxiety, Depression, or Guilt. Practice the Centering Breath referred to in the chapter on Anxiety. Don't fight the physical sensations—the racing pulse, rapid breathing, sweating or shaking—rather, allow them to happen while you turn your attention to your breathing. Breathe in, be aware of your thoughts and tension, pause, then breathe out while thinking, Let go, while you release negative emotions and physiological sensations.

The more often you turn to your breathing and awareness, the more instinctual the practice will become. You can simply be aware of the irrational beliefs as you let go of the Narrator's reactive thinking and allow the mind and body come to the single point of awareness of the moment.


       "Do not seek to follow in the footsteps of the wise; seek
                          what they sought."
                              — BASHO MATSUO

       "That it will never come again is what makes life so sweet."
                              — EMILY DICKINSON

       "I wish you happiness, peace, and a fulfilling life!"
                              — VINCE PARR
