PREFACE

"The unexamined life is not worth living."
SOCRATES

"Knowledge is learning something every day.
Wisdom is letting go of something every day."
ZEN PROVERB

In my early years I studied with the world-famous clinical psychologist Dr. Albert Ellis, Ph.D., the creator of Rational Therapy (RT). He later changed RT to Rational Emotive Therapy (RET) and then Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy (REBT), which is how we refer to it today. Albert Ellis is the grandfather of all the Rational therapies and the Cognitive Behavior Therapies (CBT) in use today.

Dr. Ellis taught me how powerful individual words in our thinking can truly be. He taught me that the way an emotion is created can be broken down into a simple formula, and that there are three types of consequences: emotional, behavioral and physiological. It's the beliefs we hold and tell ourselves over and over—about ourselves, about others, and about the things that happen in the outside world—that determine how we feel.

I have spent more than 50 years helping patients and I have seen first-hand how powerful beliefs are. I've observed 1) how consistently predictable they are, and 2) how we create these emotions in our minds by the way we think. All emotional and psychological suffering is conceived by four specific thinking habits or thought loops we get trapped in, repeating them over and over in our minds until we are nearly drowning in Anger, Anxiety, Depression and/or Guilt.

My second greatest mentor and teacher has been Steve Hagen, a Zen Priest in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He showed me how to put the icing on the top of the cake or, in this case, the experience at the pinnacle of Rational Theory. He pointed the way to a mind that doesn't struggle and made all of Rational Theory come to life. I cannot thank him enough. His teaching is what the world is most missing and what I believe is most lacking in psychology and mental health today! Lucky for us he is still alive and teaching—so get out there and see him!

This book is a summary of the teachings of these last two mentors, Ellis and Hagen. They will help you see clearly what reality truly is and what you can do to prioritize long-term meaning and contentment in life over short-term satisfaction.

You see, everyone thinks they have thousands of different problems. But what I saw clearly over time was that everyone was coming in with only four—four emotional blocks to their personal joy and happiness. People described thousands of different examples of Anger, thousands of examples of Anxiety, and many thousands more of Depression and Guilt.

I capitalize these four words throughout this book because they are more than just negative emotions—they are the four most critical blocks to happiness and contentment in life. Rarely do we have just one or two of these stumbling blocks; everyone has, at some point, encountered all four of these emotional obstacles to our contentment in life. In addition, we all have what I call our personal 'racket,' which is defined as our favorite bad feeling. It is not your favorite because you love it so much, but when you upset yourself, it is the one you choose most often. If you enjoy angrily criticizing the drivers on the road around you, Anger is probably your racket!

There is an endless assortment of things that can add to our happiness and joy. However, we all get unhappy—and stay unhappy—in exactly same way. This fact of the human condition shows how, despite how we may often feel, we are never alone! We have always been and always will be interdependent and interconnected across all varieties of the human family.

These are just a few of the things your therapist doesn't tell you, unless you have a Rational therapist or, even better, a Mindfulness (or Zen) based Rational therapist. Then you have a higher probability of getting effective, efficient, and eloquent treatment. This has been supported by nearly 70 years of research, 75 books, and over 6,000 articles on Rational Emotive Behavior Theory by Dr. Ellis alone. A simple Internet search for REBT or CBT will yield even more results supporting the effectiveness of Rational theory and mindfulness in improving mental health.

The main purpose of this book is to spell out in very simple and straight forward terms how we continue to upset ourselves and how we can effectively and practically eliminate the occurrence of these events. The wordiness has been stripped to a bare minimum to keep the message as direct and accessible as possible. I want to get directly to the heart of disturbance, to address the source of and solution to emotional suffering. Consider this a practical guide to managing these thinking habits rather than a magnum opus covering everything there is to know about Rational Theory.

Learning to manage your thoughts, emotions, and beliefs is a gradual process. There is nothing hidden or subconscious or magical about it. The solution is right in front of us and always has been. No matter your age, religion, culture, or creed, these teachings can be effectively applied to any situation at any time by any person. Many have reported noticeable progress within hours of study and application!

Learning how you create unhappiness is more than half the battle to having a mind of peace and joy. I will walk you through the process with thorough explanations, formulas, tools, and examples you can apply to your everyday life. The cause of and solution to the pain caused by Anger, Anxiety, Depression and Guilt is quite literally in your hands. If you read, practice, and apply these techniques, you will learn to master your emotions and create a mind of peace, contentment, and joy.

As Lao-Tzu so beautifully said: "When you realize there is nothing extra and nothing lacking, the whole world belongs to you."

Let's begin.


INTRODUCTION

"If knowledge does not liberate the self from the self,
then ignorance is better than such knowledge."
SANA'I

"No inside, no outside, no in-between."
HSIN HSIN MING (TRUSTING THE HEARTMIND) BY SENGTS'AN

We spend a large part of our lives arguing with reality; obsessing on past events, sighing over regrets, grumbling about unmet expectations, and railing against circumstances we perceive to be disagreeable. Yet most of us would agree, if we thought about it, that arguing with reality is a total waste of our precious time! No matter how hard we try, truth and reality are immovable things—absolutes—that can't be different. Our opinions, ideas, and beliefs can't alter the inalterable or move the immovable. Yet we waste countless hours of our finite lives debating whether things are fair, whose fault it is that they are the way they are, and why it should be this way and not that way! We create and carry with us the perpetual notion that we have piles upon piles of problems, large and small, trivial and critical, temporary and permanent.

The truth is that you only have four problems at the root of all your suffering; four devastating emotions you create from your fixed false beliefs, opinions, and ideas about reality and truth. Every painful, stressful, frustrating, or terrifying moment in our lives is caused by how we deal with Anger, how we deal with Anxiety, how we deal with Depression, and how we deal with Guilt. These emotions rob us of our life and block our joy.

The purpose of this book is to help you stop suffering. Not just today and tomorrow but for the rest of your life. It is a guide to not only relieving the emotional disturbances caused by these four blocks, but about how to replace them with what the Buddhists refer to as The Four Immeasurables: 1) lovingkindness—active goodwill towards all, 2) compassion toward others and the self, 3) sympathetic & empathetic joy, and 4) equanimity, or even-mindedness and serenity. These 'sublime attitudes,' as they are sometimes referred to in Western traditions, are too powerful to be measured. For you materialists out there (and who of us are not, raised in this society?), this means that billions of dollars cannot match, in a lifetime of experiences, these Four Immeasurables!

It sounds like a simple enough concept, doesn't it? Well, it's not new, this idea of alleviating emotional pain by replacing negative thoughts with positive ones. It is, however, often oversimplified to the point of being thoroughly ineffective in a practical sense. The actual process of letting go, of routing out these long-held ideas and beliefs is much more complex. The ideas presented here go back to the ancient Greek and Roman stoics and skeptics as well as Indian, Chinese, Japanese, Confucius, Taoist and Buddhist cultures and philosophy. But don't be discouraged—anyone can learn how! Wisdom endures through the ages.

Unfortunately, so does ignorance and disturbance. Ignorance does not mean stupid or low I.Q.—some of the most stupid-acting people I have ever met have advanced degrees and seem very smart. As George Carlin said when listening to a guest speaker, "Well, they have a great education, they went to all the great schools, they seem very smart. Aha, they are full of shit!" Ignorance is simply a lack of knowledge, learning, or information. My goal is to help alleviate this ignorance by challenging the ideas and beliefs you hold. As you will see, it is clinging to our opinions, ideas, and beliefs, that cause not only our own suffering but contribute to the suffering of others.

I will not be giving you opinions or a new belief system to grasp onto or define yourself by. What I offer you here is truth, the opposite of opinions, ideas, and beliefs. Truth can be seen directly—our belief is an illusion! However, it can't be dismissed as 'just' an illusion, because it is a real illusion in the sense that it can cause suffering. When we believe the illusion or that our opinion and ideas are right and true, this is delusion. Good luck trying to be happy there.

Delusion dooms us to disagree and fight over petty concerns, and to argue over whose beliefs are right—as if we will ever come to a rational compassionate solution under these circumstances. Throughout the course of human history, most of human suffering has been the result of beliefs. This is the world of conflict. Not just between ourselves and our loved ones but with and between nations. All wars, killing, fighting, bigotry, prejudice, hate and loathing are the posturing of the righteousness of our precious belief over someone else's. Enlightenment is the only way to see through delusion, and truth is the path to enlightenment. Truth is what you will find here and in my online course.

Also, and I think even more importantly, we can begin teaching these to our children as soon as they enter elementary school and even before, if the parents have been trained. We can prepare them for a rational, peaceful, purposeful life. An observation by Socrates inscribed over the door of the library of Alexandra says, "The unexamined life is not worth living." Teaching your children this is the most important thing you can give them. You are giving them the keys to the good life.

In addition to this book, I have also created an online program, The 4 Blocks to Happiness Mastery Course at theparrinstitute.org. The course is not absolutely necessary for understanding the concepts in this book, but the videos, podcasts, and exercises in it can be extremely helpful in learning and remembering what you read here.

The goal of this book and The 4 Blocks to Happiness Mastery Course found on my website at parrinstitute.org is three-pronged:

    1: The almost complete elimination of human disturbance
    2: Personal happiness and contentment
    3: Enlightenment

Yes, this is a tall order, and you may be skeptical. It is good to be skeptical! I am one of the biggest skeptics there is; I belong to two national skeptic organizations and I sit on the board as vice-president of one, The Institute for Science and Human Values.

So please by all means, be skeptical, doubt, and look for ways to solve our human issues and eliminate suffering. What else are we going to do with our precious time here—watch Dancing with the Stars and eat Cheetos?!
